---
layout: post
title: CPUID
date: 2017-09-28
comments: false
categories: [ "cpuid" ]
---

[CPUID](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CPUID) is an opcode present in the x86 architecture that provides applications with information about the processor.

In today's article, I'll show you how to invoke this opcode and extract the information that it holds.

## The Opcode

The [CPUID opcode](http://x86.renejeschke.de/html/file_module_x86_id_45.html) is actually rather simple. Using `EAX` we can control `CPUID` to output different pieces of information. The following table outlines all of the information available to us.

| `EAX` | Description |
|-------|-------------------------------------|
| `0`   | Vendor ID string; maximum `CPUID` value supported |
| `1`   | Processor type, family, model, and stepping |
| `2`   | Cache information |
| `3`   | Serial number |
| `4`   | Cache configuration |
| `5`   | Monitor information |
| `80000000h` | Extended Vendor ID |
| `80000001h` | Extended processor type, family model, and stepping |
| `80000002h`-`80000004h` | Extended processor name |

As you can see, there's quite a bit of information available to us.

I think that if you were to take a look in `/proc/cpuinfo`, you would see similar information:

{% highlight text %}
➜  ~ cat /proc/cpuinfo 
processor : 0
vendor_id : GenuineIntel
cpu family  : 6
model   : 142
model name  : Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-7500U CPU @ 2.70GHz
stepping  : 9
. . . 
{% endhighlight %}

## Processor name

We'll put together an example that will read out the processor name, and print it to screen.

When `CPUID` is invoked with a `0` in `RAX`, the vendor string is split across `RBX`, `RDX` and `RCX`. We need to piece this information together into a printable string.

To start, we need a buffer to store the vendor id. We know that the id will come back in 3 chunks of 4-bytes each; so we'll reserve 12 bytes in total.

{% highlight asm %}
section .bss
    vendor_id:   resb 12 
{% endhighlight %}

The program starts and we execute `cpuid`. After that, we stuff it into the `vendor_id` buffer that's been pre-allocated.

{% highlight asm %}
section .text
    global _start

_start:
    mov   rax, 0
    cpuid

    mov   rdi, vendor_id
    mov   [rdi], ebx
    mov   [rdi + 4], edx
    mov   [rdi + 8], ecx
{% endhighlight %}

Print it out to screen using the linux system call write.

{% highlight asm %}
    mov   rax, 4
    mov   rbx, 1
    mov   rcx, vendor_id
    mov   rdx, 12
    int   0x80
{% endhighlight %}

. . and, get out

{% highlight asm %}
    mov   rax, 1
    mov   rbx, 0
    int   0x80
{% endhighlight %}

## Testing

Assembling and executing this code is pretty easy.

{% highlight text %}
$ nasm -f elf64 -g cpuid.asm
$ ld -s -o cpuid cpuid.o    
$ ./cpuid 
GenuineIntel
{% endhighlight %}

## From here

There are so many other system services that will allow you to view data about your processor. Going through the documentation, you'll create yourself a full `cpuinfo` replica in no time.

