---
layout: post
title: libuv
date: 2023-07-04
comments: false
categories: [ "" ]
---

[libuv](https://github.com/libuv/libuv) is a multi-platform library that provides your
programs with asynchronous capabilities through the use of an event loop. [node.js](https://nodejs.org/en) has been the most mainstream usage of this library.

Today's post will talk about this library and show some working examples.

### Features

[libuv](https://github.com/libuv/libuv) provides a quite a set of features:

* Event loop
* Async file and network I/O
* File system events
* IPC
* Thread pool
* Signal handling
* High resolution clock

### Event loop

When you're programming in an event-driven environment, you need a medium that can transfer control over to your program when an event occurs. The event loop's job is to do exactly this, running forever.

If you were to think about it in c-pseudo code, it might look something like this.

{% highlight c %}
while (events_to_process) {
    event = get_next_event();
    
    if (event.callback) {
        event.callback();
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

### Watchers

The list of handles that can send us events, and signal our application are here:

{% highlight c %}
/* Handle types. */
typedef struct uv_loop_s uv_loop_t;
typedef struct uv_handle_s uv_handle_t;
typedef struct uv_stream_s uv_stream_t;
typedef struct uv_tcp_s uv_tcp_t;
typedef struct uv_udp_s uv_udp_t;
typedef struct uv_pipe_s uv_pipe_t;
typedef struct uv_tty_s uv_tty_t;
typedef struct uv_poll_s uv_poll_t;
typedef struct uv_timer_s uv_timer_t;
typedef struct uv_prepare_s uv_prepare_t;
typedef struct uv_check_s uv_check_t;
typedef struct uv_idle_s uv_idle_t;
typedef struct uv_async_s uv_async_t;
typedef struct uv_process_s uv_process_t;
typedef struct uv_fs_event_s uv_fs_event_t;
typedef struct uv_fs_poll_s uv_fs_poll_t;
typedef struct uv_signal_s uv_signal_t;

/* Request types. */
typedef struct uv_req_s uv_req_t;
typedef struct uv_getaddrinfo_s uv_getaddrinfo_t;
typedef struct uv_getnameinfo_s uv_getnameinfo_t;
typedef struct uv_shutdown_s uv_shutdown_t;
typedef struct uv_write_s uv_write_t;
typedef struct uv_connect_s uv_connect_t;
typedef struct uv_udp_send_s uv_udp_send_t;
typedef struct uv_fs_s uv_fs_t;
typedef struct uv_work_s uv_work_t;

/* None of the above. */
typedef struct uv_cpu_info_s uv_cpu_info_t;
typedef struct uv_interface_address_s uv_interface_address_t;
typedef struct uv_dirent_s uv_dirent_t;
{% endhighlight %}

These are the handles that we can register interest in; so the system will raise interesting events to us.
 
### Get started

Before we get started, the libuv library needs to be installed along with the development files. In order to do this on my Debian machine, I'll install the development and the runtime files.

```
libuv1 - asynchronous event notification library - runtime library
libuv1-dev - asynchronous event notification library - development files
```

Now, when we build an executable we need to link to the `uv` library using `-luv`. For the CMake test application that I'm writing with this article, I used:

{% highlight text %}
target_link_libraries(uvtest uv)
{% endhighlight %}

Where `uvtest` is the name of my application.

### First program

The "hello, world" of event loops. We'll allocate the event loop, run the loop, and then cleanup.

{% highlight c %}
int main() {
    /* allocate and init the loop */
    uv_loop_t *loop = malloc(sizeof(uv_loop_t));
    uv_loop_init(loop);

    /* run the loop */
    uv_run(loop, UV_RUN_DEFAULT);

    /* clean up */
    uv_loop_close(loop);
    free(loop);
    
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

### Idle

While our program is doing "nothing", waiting for the next event we can register a function to execute. You'll notice in this code that we're using a `uv_idle_t` rather than a `uv_loop_t` (as above). Using `uv_idle_t` provides us access to register an "idler" function.

{% highlight c %}
int64_t counter = 0;

void count_to_10(uv_idle_t* handle) {
    printf("Counter at: %d\n", counter++);

    if (counter > 10) {
        uv_idle_stop(handle);
    }
}

int main() {
    uv_idle_t idler;

    uv_idle_init(uv_default_loop(), &idler);
    uv_idle_start(&idler, count_to_10);

    uv_run(uv_default_loop(), UV_RUN_DEFAULT);

    uv_loop_close(uv_default_loop());
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

The idle function, `count_to_10` counts up until we exceed 10 and then calls `uv_idle_stop` which is our exit.

### Finishing up

This has just been an introduction to the absolute basics of libuv.
